---
layout: post
title: Vaccine efficacy
date: 2020-11-23T12:58:03+00:00
author: plonzari
categories: numbers
---

As far as I understand the phase III trials the result can be interpreted as follows.

If there are $$N_1$$ voluntaries receiving a vaccine and $$N_2$$ voluntaries receiving a placebo, and, at a certain 
point in time $$V_1$$ and $$V_2$$ voluntaries infected with Sars-Cov-2. Then one can infer attack rates as
$$p_i=\frac{V_i}{N_i}$$. In the end the vaccine efficacy is 

$$V_e=1-\frac{p_1}{p_2}$$

For the Moderna vaccine the numbers seem 
<a href="https://www.statnews.com/2020/11/16/modernas-covid-19-vaccine-is-strongly-effective-early-look-at-data-show"> 
 <em>to be</em> </a>
 to be $$N_1=N_2=15000$$ $$V_1=5$$ and $$V_2=90$$, which gives $V_e=.94$.
 
 What bothers me are the very low numbers of infected peoples, which could imply that there is a relatively high 
 probability that the efficacy is significantly lower. 
 
 Let us consider the probability $$P(p_i|N_i,V_i)$$. It could be estimated under the assumption of independent 
 infections. I would like to find a lower value for $$V_l$$ such that the probability  that $$V_e$$ is lower
 than $$V_l$$ is some small value (1%).
 
 We would  have to solve the equation
 
 $$\int dp_1 dp_2 P(p_1 | N_1,V_1)P(p_2 | N_2,V_2)  \theta(1-\frac{p_1}{p_2}-V_l)=.001.$$
 
 A very simple model would imply 
 with $$K_i$$ an appropriate 
 normalization constraint. In the end we have to add up all the possible infection rates with and without vaccine 
 that  are compatible with the numbers obtained in the trial and which give an efficacy lower than a certain 
 threshold. As it turns out the Moderna vaccine has an efficacy of more than 85% with 99% probability and and
 an efficacy higher than 80% with 99.9% probability. The number have been estimated with
 <a href="https://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=int+e%5E%28-x%29+x%5E5%2F120+exp%28-%28y-90%29%5E2%2F2%2F90-3%29+*UnitStep%5Bx%2Fy-0.19%5D+%2F+1.18393+dx+dy%2C+x%3D-0+to+30%2C+y%3D-0+to+400"> 
 <em>Wolfram Alpha</em> </a>.
 
 The Pfizer vaccine has $$V_1=8$$ and $$V_2=162$$ which gives the limits 89% and 86.5% for 99% and 99.9% 
 probability. The Astra Zeneca one has $$V_1=30$$ and $$V_2=101$$ and, not surprising, has lower limits.
 With 99% probability the efficacy is better than 54% but for a 99.9% probability one has to lower the limit to 47%.
 
 If I understand correctly this vaccine efficacy can be related to the famous herd immunity concept. Indeed,
 if one individual infects $$R$$ others with vaccine the infected would be $$(1-V_e)*R$$. The virus will only
 propagate if $$V_e<1-\frac{1}{R}$$. Therefore $$V_e$$ has to be better than the proportion of infected population 
 needed for "herd immunity" in the absence of a vaccine. With $$R$$ between 3 and 5, $$V_e$$ needs to be bigger than 
 80%. Both Moderna and Pfizer vaccines are enough (with high probability) while the Oxford vaccine has between 
 5% and 75% probability to require additional measures to curb the pandemic.
 