---
layout: post
title: My preferred party - The New Greens
date: 2020-11-23T11:58:03+00:00
author: plonzari
categories: politics
---
In two weeks there will be elections in Romania. Unfortunately, or fortunately, it is easy to choose the best
 out of multiple bad choices. Still, it is unpleasant not to have a party or, at least, a candidate one could 
 wholeheartedly trust and support.
 
 What I miss most is a party with a solid ecological program. There is an
 <a href="https://www.edupedu.ro/cercetatorul-virgil-iordache-situatia-politicilor-de-mediu-in-programele-unor-partide-romanesti/"> 
 <em>interesting article</em> </a> on  this  (in Romanian), from which what struck me most was the association between 
 climate changes attitudes and ideologies in the first figure: in the western democracies ecological thinking 
 is associated with left , anti free-market ideologies. In former communist countries there is no such association, 
 everyone being uniformly uninterested in ecology.
 
 My feeling is that ecology does not need to be associated with the left. A green party is naturally a centrist
 one. One argument is that it can be argued that everywhere parties denying the need for green politics are 
 effectively representing extreme right or left positions. I include here many conservative parties like the
 US republicans and UK conservatives, both associated with the extreme right wing. 
 
 So, what would my ideal green party support? First strong government because green policies involve large scale 
 projects, strong education and large investments in fundamental and applied research. Good and transparent 
 governance because strong governments are plagued by corruption. Free global market because
 the nature and climate know no borders. Foreign intervention for the same reasons. 
 Private initiatives,because it is almost impossible to know beforehand which is the best way forward and where
 the best ideas can  be found.  New, fair and efficient taxation because both "low taxes" and 
 "wealth redistribution" are wholly  insufficient ideologies.