---
layout: post
title: The problem with bubbles
date:   2022-08-09T02:51:45+00:00
author: plonzari
categories: politics
---

For some time I have accepted that each of us is somehow trapped inside a (filter) bubble, an echo 
chamber that reflects over and over our own opinions. The same happens for everyone else and their 
opinions become as distorted and far from reality as ours. There is here a dangerous relativism, 
because, even if there are bubbles and echo cambers, some of them can still be mainly truthful 
representations of the world and others simply wrong.

<!--more-->

This concept of bubbles is very useful as a caution. Firstly we always have to assume that we 
do not have a complete picture of a particular reality. Secondly, if we want to predict what 
others will do, we have to know if they are exposed to very different information from ourselves.

But we must not assume that all bubbles are equivalent. My main assumption is that there are
individual echo chambers for conspiracy theories. For example anti-vaxxers, flat-earthers or
Qanon(s) get their information mostly from like-minded individuals. I also know that people with 
certain populist political orientation have no exposure to competing views. We know their ideas
and arguments, and we know that they are wrong. I might be in a bubble, but there can be such thing 
as a "truthful" echo (chamber).

A critical view of our own assumptions is essential. But after identifying and correcting our biases
we have to defend our conclusions. There is always a way to frame a question such that the answer 
is binary, and if we are right then the competing view is wrong. One does not debate crime with a 
killer or earth sciences with a flat-earther. The same way you do not bend your world view for the 
sake of conspiracy theorists, you convince them (doubtful), treat them or even trick them.


