---
layout: post
title: The problem of Ukrainian refugees divides Europe
date:   2023-02-24T2:51:45+00:00
author: plonzari
categories: politics
---

The results of the latest
<a href="https://europa.eu/eurobarometer/surveys/detail/2872"> 
Eurobarometer poll </a> on the Ukrainian war can be explained on only two 
axis: overall satisfaction and refugees acceptance. 
*An exercise in clickbait.*

<!--more-->

The most recent survey of the public opinion in the European Union 
contains a dozen questions directly pertaining to the war in Ukraine. The 
poll tries to gauge the satisfaction with the actions taken by the EU in 
support of Ukraine. The respondents are asked to indicate their 
level of satisfaction with such actions as 
"Financing the purchase and supply of military equipment to Ukraine"
or 
"Welcoming into the EU people fleeing the war". There are also questions 
regarding the citizen's agreement with the anti-Russian stance of the EU.

Overall, the europeans seem to support the pro-Ukraine position. I wanted 
to  see if some quick-and-dirty data analysis of the raw data can 
uncover some interesting trends.

After extracting the data I chose to work with the question-by-country 
matrix containing the proportion of positive answers (the questions are such
that the positive answers  are always pro-Ukrainian). 
A low-rank (2) approximation of the matrix shows that 
**more than two-thirds of the variation in this matrix can be explained 
by only two directions.**



{% include euro_ukraine.html %}

The plot above contains a projections of the answers (%) 
to eleven questions on the 2D surface of the two composite axes 
supporting most of the variation. The horizontal axis is the variation
of the average (with more-or-less equal weight) of the overall 
satisfaction with EU policies and agreement with their importance. For 
me is somewhat surprising that the central-south-european countries seem 
to be, uniformly, the least anti-russian. I can understand the Bulgarians, 
due to their cultural ties, but I was hoping that the Romanians would
remember the not-so-distant past!
The level of support shown in Poland, baltic and scandinavian states is 
not really surprising. As an aside I am always surprised how different 
are the Danish from the Germans.

The other surprise is that the second most important source of variation 
(the vertical axis above) is strongly defined  by the level of support for 
the Ukrainian refugees. OK, the Romanians can be quite nasty, but why would
be the Greeks so accepting of refugees: don't they have enough problems 
with people fleeing the wars in the middle-east?
  
